This is a course on the principles and paradigms of programming languages.
This is a course on the principles and paradigms of programming languages.
This is a course on the principles and paradigms of programming languages.
Is there a fourth option?
Is that what you said?
Yeah, really hard.
Really hard.
This is anonymous, just so you guys know.
I'm not recording what you say.
Can you guys see two questions, by the way?
Or just one?
You see two?
Great.
Thank you.
I'm taking an exam.
I'm trying to figure out, like, what is it?
Are we going to do, like, a couple of them?
Yeah.
I don't know that.
Like, I feel like we're going to do a couple of those.
Yeah, professor, really hard.
They do this every day, right?
And then they're like, I don't know.
So I'm like, you're really weird.
I'm like, I don't know.
I'm like, I don't know.
I'm like, I don't know.
I'm like, I don't know.
I think my answer to that is I'm like, I'm not great.
I'm like, I don't know.
I'm like, I don't know.
I'm like, I don't know.
I'm like, I don't know.
Fair enough.
Yeah.
Can we get participation points from participating in class, or is that only in class?
Yes.
In class matters, but a lot of it is, like, if I can know your name.
I have a photo of everyone, and I match it with your name, and then based on how well
I remember you participating in class.
So it's a little bit of a loose system.
But it kind of works.
Bring a name tag.
It might work.
It might help.
All right, guys.
We have 27 responses here, so I think we are gonna close it out, because it looks like
there are roughly 30 people.
Those of you in the back, you should scoot forward.
Why not?
You know?
Come on up a little bit.
We will be looking at some code on the screen, and the code is a little bit small, so the
closer up you are, the better.
Can I show you the responses?
Responses.
Okay.
That sounds good.
So harder than it was medium, and definitely not easy.
And then in terms of fairness-ish.
All right.
So compared to last semester, maybe a bit harder.
Good to know.
I will take that into account as we go forward.
Thank you for your feedback.
Don't forget, we do drop the lowest midterm, so if that's this one, great.
If it's not this one, also great.
Up to you.
All right.
Welcome to a fun lecture in CS538.
I try and add these as much as I can, because I like to talk about things that aren't just
the stuff that's on the ACM, like, requirements for what principles and paradigms of programming
languages is.
Before we get into the fun stuff, some notes.
The PA and the homework are not going to be released.
If you already have a copy somehow, because you stole them while they were halfway released
or something, ignore them.
They are not released.
You don't have to do them until after spring break.
Have a fun spring break.
Midterms will be graded soon-ish.
I have them all scanned.
The TA and I will be grading them.
We will get those back to you hopefully within a week, and then once that is done, I will
be able to update Canvas with your current grade.
This will be unscaled, so it won't be – if there is a curve, there's no curve on this
grade, but it will have your 10% bonus for submitting early.
It will have the individual weighting of each assignment versus the other assignments.
This should be a pretty accurate reflection of what your grade will be at this point in
time.
I'm hoping that that will be done before spring break ends.
It takes a while, so please be patient.
I have a coding project that is school-related, so it's not work, it's not industry stuff.
It's a coding project.
If somebody is a very proficient Python coder and interested in hacking on something, come
chat with me either after class or in office hours or send me an email.
It might be hard.
I don't know.
We'll figure it out.
There is a course eval that is the midterm course eval.
You got it from the school.
They ask you to fill it out.
Please do.
I appreciate it, because I take that information into all of the rest of my teaching.
Let me know if I'm doing anything poorly or well, and I will try and fix or stay the course.
Those are my notes.
There were a lot of them.
Any notes from you guys?
It's a fun lecture, so we can talk about anything.
Anything on your mind?
Yeah?
These lecture slides are called static analysis.
They are on Canvas.
Yep.
Yep.
I will post the solutions to the midterm.
I don't typically go over them, but we can do that in office hours if you want to stop
by.
Anything else?
All right.
Today's lecture is loosely based...
It was going to be something totally different.
And then I read this article this morning called fixing the next 10,000 aliasing bugs.
And just from the title, you know that's gonna be super exciting.
I was like, yes!
This is the thing I want to spend an hour and a half chatting about.
No, not actually.
It's a really boring looking title, and only a real PL nerd would get excited about that.
But that's because they missed out on the real title.
Which is using type inference to make $150.
Minor correction.
To steal $150 million.
So the algorithm that we have been covering, Hindley-Milner type inference, loosely can
be used to describe an attack that took place two years ago and resulted in somebody literally
stealing $150 million.
All of the material, or almost all of the material, comes from this blog post, the one
that I showed at the start there.
All the animations are my own.
All right.
So let's take a look at Java.
I'm certainly not proficient in Java, but I have a little piece of Java for you.
If you have your computer with you, feel free to go to my GitHub, to the CS538 snippets
repo and take a look at the code that is there.
Otherwise, I'm gonna put the code up on the screen so we can all look at it as a class.
But if you want it so you can play around with it, do so.
All right.
All right.
So in that folder, you should have a bug.java, if you can find it.
And when we look at this...
All right.
I can go one bigger, two bigger, three bigger.
Yeah.
Is that readable?
If it's not readable, there are plenty of seats up front.
So please do come up front.
All right.
We have Java code.
I have not written Java code since probably my sophomore year of college.
So even getting this to compile was like, what is going on?
But I did.
So that's good.
We have a class called MyList.
This might come out from you having to write a data structure in one of your intro CS classes.
You're told, write a data structure for a list in Java.
This list should be able to add items of arbitrary length.
So even though it started out as an array of ten items, once I add the eleventh item,
it should be able to restructure and become an array of length 11.
Or 20.
Or 100.
So it should be a dynamically lengthed list.
But we have to stick within Java, so we're going to use an array to do that.
And every time we go past our bounds, we will reallocate a new array, copy over all
the old elements, and be good to go.
Great.
So we have some code.
My challenge to you is identify the bug.
And I'll give you five to ten minutes to do so.
If you have code on your computer, feel free to download it, compile it, run it, and figure
out what's going on.
If you don't have code, talk to somebody next to you.
Or stare at this for a little while.
There is one piece at the very bottom that's not being shown.
All that is is the main function, where I create a list S, I create a list T, add elements,
and then, like, concatenate the two lists together.
All right.
So...
Find the bug.
I'll wander around and chat with you guys individually to see what you come up with.
But give it five or ten minutes of debugging.
And I'll see you guys later.
Bye.

Bye.

Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Bye.
Bye.

Okay.
So what did we come up with?
Who's got some ideas?
I heard a lot of different ideas floating around.
Did anybody get an actual error?
Was anybody able to compile this and run it with some sort of main?
Like changing this at all and getting an actual error?
Okay.
Fair enough.
Did anybody come up with something that might be going wrong?
All right.
I'd like to poll the class.
You have four functions, if you include the constructor as a function.
Where is the bug?
Could be based on your gut or just...
I don't know.
Something else.
But I'm curious.
Where do you think the bug is?
Choose one of the four functions.
The constructor.
My list.
Ensure capacity.
Add.
Add all.
Okay.
We got about a 50-50 split.
Add all and ensure capacity.
So which one is it?
First of all, let's double check that I haven't, like,
just cheated the whole time, and we can actually compile this thing.
Compiles, it gives us a warning for our types, but that's fine.
And then if we actually run it, we do actually run it.
So there's no bug.
That's gonna be annoying.
In this main.
In this version of main, where we create a list, we create a second list,
we add an element to the first list, or to the second list,
add an element to the second list, and then add them together.
This part's fine.
No bugs.
Compiles.
Runs.
Without issue.
I'm gonna make a one-character change.
That's all that we're gonna change.
This is what it was.
This is what I'm changing it to.
What happens?
What we are saying now is that we're taking a list S
and add all the elements from S to that list.
So what's gonna happen?
Yeah.
There's gonna be a problem with ensure capacity.
Let's run through it and see if there is.
So we hit add all.
Our parameter C is the list S.
We are in the scope of S itself.
So when we call ensure capacity, we're using the S version of ensure capacity,
with the length of S and the length of S.
So 2 times S.
When we call ensure capacity with 2 times the length of S,
which in this case is length 1, so it's a value of 2,
we would check to see is min capacity 2 greater than array.length?
Yes.
Array.length is 1.
So then we're going to set the new capacity equal to 2.
The max of 2 and 2.
Create a new list of length 2 and copy the old list into the new list.
Is there a bug there?
Did anything break?
I don't think anything did break.
And yet, so if we recompile and we rerun, we crash.
So ensure capacity did not have any issue,
but making this change did break something.
That leaves the second group.
The group that had the intuition that the issue is in add all.
Something has gone wrong in add all after our ensure capacity check.
What is it?
Yeah.
Right.
So in Java, we are referencing this S, the length variable on that S,
which we are incrementing inside of this for loop.
However, our for loop check is saying until we are less than the length of C.length.
While we are less than C.length.
C is S. And we are incrementing the value of S's length.
So we will continue going through this for loop over and over and over
until we actually hit the bounds of the entire loop,
which is when we get our final array index out of bounds exception.
So I've got some slides to make this a bit more step by step.
Let's go to those.
The thing that we have, actually, let's go back.
Let's do this backwards.
We start with add all.
And our first step of add all is saying let's ensure the capacity of the current list
is greater than the old list with the new list combined.
So make sure that we have enough space for whatever we're doing.
And this is the, like, we're calling this the correct way.
On the first iteration, I is zero, length of our list is two,
length of C.length, or C.length is one.
We execute the body of the loop, incrementing our length.
And then setting C.length, or C.length is still one.
Loop back through, am I on the right one?
I am on the right one.
We go back to the top.
We check is I less than C.length.
It's no longer.
So we're done.
This is if we ran it with the correct inputs, like not passing S. We don't run into any
issue because C.length has remained constant.
On the other hand, if we pass in S as our parameter, first we do that same ensure capacity
check.
Then we say I is equal to zero, length is equal to two, C.length is equal to two.
When we get to our length++, we increment not only our length, but also C.length.
Because C.length is the same as our length.
Which means that C.length increments with our own length.
We go back up to the next time, increment I. I is less than C.length.
And this will continue forever and ever and ever until we actually index into the array
at an invalid location.
So this is the bug that we have found.
Questions on the bug?
It's a bit involved.
I recognize that.
So if we go back to what went wrong, we had this implicit invariant.
And it was that the length of the input list does not change between the ensure capacity
call and the for loop.
Outside of our add list, or add all function, our input list length does not change.
And you might look at that and say, that's safe, so long as we aren't multithreading.
It makes sense that if we're multithreading, maybe somebody updated the list in between.
But if we aren't multithreading, maybe we're safe.
What we found is that no, that's not true.
If we pass in the same object itself, when we increment length, we're incrementing the
input length as well.
Which means we've broken our invariant.
Sound good?
Questions?
All right.
So how does this turn into $150 million?
How many of you are familiar with DAOs?
Some number of you.
Follow, like, news and whatnot.
So before we talk about what a DAO is, we should take a second to say, what is a smart
contract?
How many of you know what smart contracts are?
Very few.
How many of you have written a smart contract?
All right.
One or two.
So a smart contract is a small piece of public code, very similar to an API endpoint.
However, different than an API endpoint is that it's run on a distributed cloud.
Typically associated with what's called a blockchain.
And the way that you purchase credits so that you can run code on this distributed
cloud is that you pay with a digital currency.
Such as Doge.
What this code is, though, is effectively anything.
We can write whatever web app we want and run it on a distributed cloud.
For example, ETH.
Or I guess Doge doesn't actually have smart contracts, but that's beside the point.
So there are languages designed to write smart contracts.
One of them, for example, is called Solidity.
Solidity looks something like this.
We create a contract and we give it a name.
And it has some stored data.
And then we define functions on that contract.
Set and get, for example.
Someone can then call these functions and provided they pay the gas to make them happen,
they will execute that code.
This is a really convenient model compared to the idea of having to spin up your own
EC2 box, where you're running all of your functions and having it all handled there.
You just deploy your code and pay other people to run it for you when you want it to be run.
Very cool.
In theory, crypto and Web3 have kind of spiraled into insanity at this point.
But fundamentally, cool idea.
You guys like seeing real code?
So this is a smart contract that I wrote that creates, like, NFTs of those audio snippets
that I showed you from before.
So not only do you put one line of HTML and I turn your web page into a podcast, I also
mint an NFT that you can then put on OpenSea.
This feature never deployed.
It was just more of a meme.
And then to show investors and be like, hey, yeah, we're Web3.
Anyway, back to the DAO.
So what is a DAO?
The original DAO was this relatively reasonable idea that we could build a smart contract
and have it be used as a distributed investment fund.
Remove the idea of a hedge fund.
Remove big banks.
They suck.
They only help the very wealthy.
Let's have a distributed hedge fund, effectively.
The functionality is very simple.
You put money in.
The money grows over time.
You vote on what the fund should invest in.
And you vote...
Your weight of your vote is corresponding to your percent ownership of the DAO.
And then obviously you get to pull money out.
Once it has grown and accumulated value.
Power to the people.
Distribute finances.
It's great.
Oops.
So...
It's a great idea.
But now we're starting to put real money in code where what if there's a bug in your code
and you can never pull out your money again?
This is an abbreviated version of the real DAO smart contract where you would be able
to withdraw money.
So when you had put in your money and it had grown and you decided it's time to pull this
money out so I can use it again, you would call this function and you would say...
Here's my ID.
This is how much money I want to withdraw.
And simplified, it would boil down...
The function boils down to roughly this.
Step one.
Calculate how many funds, how much of the money that you have in the DAO do you want
to remove?
Do you want to remove 5 ETH?
Do you want to remove 10 ETH?
0.1 ETH?
So calculate how much money you want to move.
Step two.
Prepare to move that money.
And check to see if there's an error when you remove that money.
So if they're trying to move more money than they have, for example, check.
If they are, don't do it.
Don't let somebody withdraw 10 ETH when they only have 5 ETH in their bank.
So that's what this if error or if no error, then withdraw the actual money.
They're asking for their money.
Give them the money.
Finally, zero the user's balance.
All right.
What goes wrong?
Yeah?
What if they're not withdrawing all their money?
Yep.
What do you mean?
At the bottom, that would be zero, right?
Oh, sure.
Yeah.
That's me simplifying code.
We set it to be whatever is remaining.
Or we could pretend this is full withdrawal.
Yeah.
Either way.
Yeah.
This createToken.value is basically our check to say,
will this thing, when we withdraw this amount of money,
will it cause an error?
What it's really doing is it's preparing a separate coin
for that user under the hood and all of this
that we will transfer to that user.
So there's a bit more complexity hidden behind there.
But we can think of it as an error check.
We're checking to validate, is this thing OK to do?
Yeah?
Yeah?
What's a HashMap?
It's a dictionary.
HashMap, whatever you want to call it.
Consider that we're on a distributed cloud.
It's one of the actual main purposes of smart contracts.
Yeah?
Does that do something with atomic operations
in parallel?
Sure.
So what does that mean?
What part of this is not atomic?
What part of it would you want to be atomic?
Yeah?
Or something?
That is exactly what these guys exploited.
If we have multiple of these processes running
at the same time, and they check that they're
valid all at the same time, before we
have set our actual value to zero,
then they will all say, you have 5 ETH in your bank.
Then when we withdraw 5 ETH from five different processes
running the same thing, you get 25 ETH.
While at the end, you're only ever set down to zero.
You can't have negative 20 ETH in your account.
So because these are not atomic in this check withdraw set,
we're running into this concurrency problem
where the attackers were able to literally withdraw
$150 million.
So what's going wrong?
Once again, we have this implied invariant
that at all times, the balance for a user
matches the actual money that they are owed.
And we're trying to approximate that by saying, if no error,
throw, and then withdraw.
But because that's not atomic, we don't actually
have that invariant for the two lines of code
that it really matters.
So just like in the MyList example,
we are temporarily invalidating our invariant
while our function is running.
Once we've finished running, our invariant's back and restored,
and we're fine, unless somebody was able to exploit it
in the meantime.
So atomic to the rescue?
Can we just wrap all of our code in mutexes
and basically check, lock this piece, unlock this piece?
The idea here would be to take learnings
from databases or operating systems
where we do this all the time.
And maybe atomic actions will fix this.
But not quite.
So Uber published a lengthy blog post
roughly talking about all of this.
Uber does a ton of their development
in the language Golang, which is very similar to C,
but has a lot better guarantees, generally.
And what we're doing here is we want to take,
we can think of it very similar.
The square brackets are lists.
Effectively, they're called slices in Go.
No big deal.
They're basically just lists.
So we have a list of strings.
And then we have a safe append function.
And that function is going to lock our,
set our locks so that we can update the my results slice,
which is technically, or it's technically a slice,
but it looks like a list.
So we're only going to write to our list with the lock.
And then we can set up multiple threads.
One of the amazing things about Go
is that you can just say Go function,
and then it will spin up a thread
to run that function for you asynchronously.
So we can set 10 threads going all at once to take our string
and split it up and append it to our list of strings.
But what's going to go wrong is that even though we only
can write one at a time to safe atomic,
we can read concurrently.
And so we might be halfway through a write
and then start reading.
And because we've only written half of the content,
we might not have copied the correct length,
or we might not have grabbed the entire list.
Any number of things could go wrong.
So when we do the read right here,
and we request my results, this is undetermined.
It could be any value within reason.
So maybe what we could do is we could wrap literally everything
in mutexes, but now we're in single-threaded land,
and that kind of sucks for its own reasons.
Nobody wants to write single-threaded code.
It's super slow, especially with the death of Moore's law.
So the shared issue here, we have
this idea of invariance being violated repeatedly
to multiple aliased references.
Aliasing means we have multiple references to the same memory.
Here, we have multiple references of my results
up here and in the append.
In this place, we have multiple references
to the actual balances feature that stores our information.
And the last one, we have multiple references
to our length, or to our array, which has the length variable.
So we have aliases of the same important memory.
Question?
Yeah, this might not be relevant,
but regarding the mutex and any distributed system,
how does a mutex work with something
that's like a blockchain distributed system?
Oh, it certainly wouldn't.
So you can't do, like, mutexes as far as possible
to contribute it?
So mutex needs to operate at the underlying level for it to work.
You need to have some sort of supervisor saying,
lock this thing, and then unlock this thing.
And if you don't have something like that, it's not going to work.
If you could build that into your chain,
you could make something like it work.
But by default in ETH, you'd probably
have some trouble with that.
All right, lots of things.
All right, so our invariants have been violated by multiple.
Did I say inviolated?
Invariants are violated by multiple aliased references.
An alias is when we have multiple references to the same memory.
Let's try and fix that.
So to the original title of the blog post,
solving the next or fixing the next 10,000 aliasing bugs,
or whatever it was.
The author makes the point that this is not new.
Tony Hoare gave a presentation about 10 years ago
called Null References, the Billion Dollar Mistake,
where he talks about, in ALGOL, the language
that he developed in the 60s, he included
the idea of a null reference.
And every other language since then
has said, null is a good idea.
Let's also have null.
But how many bugs come up because of null?
Maybe a billion dollars worth of bugs.
Maybe more.
Maybe it's even crazier.
So over the last 20 years, people
have started saying, how can we fix null pointers?
The issue fundamentally is that every variable can be null.
Developers then have what options?
What can a developer do to handle null?
You're writing C code.
What do you do when you're worried
about this sort of stuff?
Yeah.
Put if statements everywhere.
That is the first one.
Excellent.
Good order.
We can always do a null check and say, if the thing is null,
do this.
Otherwise, do whatever else.
What else can we do?
Yeah.
We can use union types in C.
OK, I haven't used union types in C.
In other languages, definitely.
And that's what I will talk about on the next slide.
What else can we do?
Yeah.
Exception handling.
C doesn't have exceptions.
Right?
Am I wrong?
New versions of C might.
I don't think C has exceptions.
But in other languages, we have exception handling.
We can capture null pointers.
Sure.
We can also just be very careful and try not to mess up.
And I would say the last option is segfile.
But these are antiquated ideas.
You should not have to do any one of these.
You shouldn't have to do null checks.
You shouldn't have to be very careful.
And you shouldn't be segfaulting.
And instead, what we should do is
we should fix it at the language level
with things like union types, which I guess are in C,
but are only more recently in C for sure.
Either way.
But a ton of other languages have this idea
that things, you can tag them as either being never null
or possibly null.
So you have something like TypeScript,
where you put this little question mark
after your variable name.
And what you're saying there is, this thing is a number, maybe.
It also might be null.
And whenever you use it, you should check to see is it null.
But if it doesn't have a question mark,
the name property is never null.
And you never have to worry that that thing
might be uninitialized.
So a bunch of languages are doing this.
TypeScript does it.
You can do front-end or back-end dev with that.
Rust does it.
You can do systems dev with that.
Swift does it.
You can write iOS apps with that.
Kotlin does it.
I don't know if anybody uses Kotlin.
So that's null pointers that have been
addressed at the compiler level.
These languages now solve this problem for you.
When you accidentally use a possibly null value
and don't check if it's null, the compiler
will tell you that's an error.
Don't do that.
Can we treat aliasing the same way?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
So in SQL, I think they have something like some.
Oh, SQL's a nightmare with null.
Yeah, but no, it's interesting.
SQL has null, but it also has empty and other very weird
states that it can be in.
But it also depends on the variant in SQL.
So SQL has some null handling, but then it also
has some not null handling that gets into issues.
Other questions or ideas about null pointers?
Yeah.
Why are null pointers bad?
Why are null pointers good and bad?
Sometimes, they're useful, but not always.
They have some use, right?
Sometimes, they're not.
Sometimes, they're not always.
Sometimes, they're not always.
Yeah.
So why are null pointers bad?
And I think that's, to some extent,
a philosophical question.
Should you ever use a null pointer?
But it's also very much just an engineering problem.
When you are trying to learn C, you run into a lot of segfaults.
When you are trying to learn JavaScript,
you run into a lot of undefined is not a function.
You guys have probably hit that one a lot in this class.
When you try and learn a language like Python, though,
I guess you also still get none can't be used like that.
But you can't ever call a non-function.
You can't ever reference something and use something
if it's a null pointer.
You're not getting segfaults.
Or if you're in TypeScript, even better,
you're being forced to handle null.
So it's not that you don't have null.
It's that you only have to think about it on the things
where it's relevant.
I can still initialize my thing to be empty.
But in doing so, I have to specify
that it can be empty, which means everybody else knows
that's potentially empty.
But not everything is empty.
Name is always going to be a string.
And I never have to put an if statement
to check, is name undefined?
Which leads to cleaner code, and it leads to fewer mistakes.
Fewer bugs.
Cool.
So what can we do about aliasing?
Because we found this issue that aliasing presents bugs
in our code as well.
It's not just null pointers.
It's aliasing, too.
Well, inherently, in most languages,
every reference is implicitly aliasable.
We can always say x equals y and create an alias of y with x
so that x and y both point to the same thing.
No language outside of the one that we're about to discuss
prevents you from being able to do that.
What this means is that what developers
can do to prevent aliasing is what?
How can we stop aliasing bugs, such as the ones
that we've just seen?
Yeah?
If we only have an immutable copy of something,
wouldn't that, like, start to do, like, a bad thing?
If we only have an immutable copy,
what would stop me from saying x equals y?
It's best practice to say x equals set y.
Yeah, so I think that definitely gets to the right idea.
Have you written Rust?
Yeah, OK.
So in JavaScript, we started using the immutable list
library, where we couldn't update any of the variables.
But that didn't actually stop us from having two references
to those immutable lists.
So there's nothing inherent in immutability
that says we can't have multiple references, which
is why there's nothing here.
There's not really any way for the developer
to prevent aliasing of memory that they think
that they exclusively own.
Because maybe somebody else is also copying it.
But what if we were able to create a fixed language where
we can flag references as being exclusive,
meaning they have no aliasing allowed,
or they could be shared, which means
they can be aliased as normal.
So shared memory, shared references
would be just like every other variable you've ever used.
Exclusive references, you would not
be able to have two pointers to that same memory.
So for example, we might say foo is an exclusive XCL,
exclusive new foo.
And then if we tried to say bar is
equal to foo, which would create two references to that memory,
we would get a compile error.
Well, I guess we'd get a compile error here
when we tried to use foo.
Because foo is no longer a reference to our thing,
we've transferred the reference.
So what we're doing is we're adding a new alias type
modifier to all of our variables.
Our variables are now either shared or they're exclusive.
And we can use the compiler to perform type inference
on our code and say, are we misusing exclusive pointers
or misusing shared pointers in any of our places?
We will run type inference and type checking
to find those sorts of bugs.
So if we wrote a slightly larger function, increment,
it could take a parameter x, which is exclusive.
So x is an exclusive non-zero number.
Then we could convert it to an int.
We could increment it.
We can do whatever we want.
Anything inside of our increment function,
we have exclusive control over x.
Nobody else is going to be updating x.
And the compiler will tell us that based on the types
that we've annotated the rest of our code with.
So the xcl flag guarantees that no one else
is accessing the variable.
And we can safely invalidate our invariants.
If we had something like this in Solidity or in Java
or, what was the other one, in Go,
we could prevent the errors that we were seeing before.
And the reveal of all of this is that this
isn't some crazy new concept.
This is what Rust does with its borrow checker.
Rust checks to make sure that you're
treating your exclusive variables as exclusive
and your shared variables as shared.
And so it has the borrow checker,
not just for memory management.
It also does aliasing.
All right.
Questions on any of those last slides?
Borrow checker, Rust, things of this nature, exclusive?
Even with that fix in Rust, to go back to the dowel example,
that doesn't fix that issue, does it?
In the exact solution, does it?
Because that's a problem with parallel operations
on not one central piece.
Right.
So you would need your underlying system
to be written in Rust and to have these sorts of things
be part of your exclusive memory.
So nobody else should be able to access balance
while I am accessing balance.
Inside of this function, where I'm running this,
no one else should be able to run that function while I
am running this function.
And my smart contract, if it were written in Rust,
should prevent other people running the same smart
contract.
Because we're all trying to update.
The issue is that we're updating balances.
We're checking balances and updating balances.
If we make that exclusive, we should be fine.
You can make that exclusive across distributed
and correct?
Right.
How does that component come into play?
So there's, I'm blanking on the term, for consistency.
That is a problem for consistency
of distributed systems.
I mean, the heart of all of crypto stuff
is built on consensus algorithms, such as like Paxos
or what's the cool one?
Blanking on that as well.
It's been too long since I've done distributed.
But there are protocols that allow
you to achieve consistency for your data store, which
is the blockchain.
So the blockchain is always consistent.
So you just need a language on top of it where you can say,
no one should be updating this part of the blockchain
at the same time as me.
Yeah?
So what's the difference between a mutex on balances
versus a reference on mutex on balances?
So the difference between a mutex on balances
here is addressing this at the application level,
where I'm saying, no one can be running inside of my scope
this same stuff.
You would want a mutex for the entire protocol,
for the entire blockchain, to do that.
And that would be probably prohibitively slow
on the chain.
Because you'd say, no one else can, like,
operate on the chain while I am operating on the chain.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
What is the reference on the reference here?
I'm not quite sure how you would bring in the exclusive reference
here.
But it would have to be at a more fundamental layer
than this piece.
Yeah.
I don't know what the reference is.
I don't know what the reference is in that.
But I think it's similar to the reference
that was used for graphing the data.
No.
So this is part of the language.
This is a new feature for the language
that the compiler is going to be enforcing.
There's no actual runtime implication of exclusive.
Oh, OK.
This is a piece that's saying, I'm going to check your code
and make sure no one else can operate on this thing
while you are operating on this thing.
Here, with mutexes, we have very much runtime implication,
and checks, and stuff of that sort.
So you still want to have mutexes in a world
where you'd have exclusive references.
I could see that still playing a part.
Other questions?
Yeah.
If you're not writing in Rust, you're
risking that problem?
Even if you're writing in Rust, sometimes
you're risking that problem.
But yeah.
No.
I mean, actually, while we're on this slide,
this is a reasonable piece of Go code,
where the whole point of me writing code in Go
is because I want to distribute all of my tasks concurrently
and just say, everyone go do this thing,
and come back and tell me once it's done.
So the idea of writing a for loop,
where I'm running a bunch of threads
in parallel across some shared memory,
that probably happens all the time.
And you would run into, potentially, this problem,
even if you're trying to solve it with mutexes.
Yeah.
Do you get the couple when you do the product?
Like, are you doing the product?
But then, do you get any parallelism?
Like, you don't get any benefit of all of the cores
on your CPU, if you put read-write locks everywhere
on here.
But yeah, you can.
It's just then you kind of lose out.
Yeah.
So what's it exactly like that I'm going to use the mute?
Like, if you were in Rust, is that
the type-checking you're doing when you're doing
do-able registers and non-do-able registers?
Or is there something else that you're not doing?
So in Rust, if we say, let x equal mem,
we allocate some space on the heap.
We say x is equal to that mem.
And then we say y equal x, or let y equal x.
Then we try to access y.
We're good to go.
If we try to access x, all right,
I've chosen a poor letter, we are not good to go.
We run into an issue.
And this is a compile issue that says, hey,
you don't have access to x anymore.
And that's just the default behavior.
That's what the borrow checker will ensure for any memory
that you create.
Then you can create mutable references and stuff
on top of that.
But that's kind of a layer above.
We will all start working on Rust quite soon.
I think PA6.
So it'll be in two weeks, or two weeks after spring break,
where you'll write your first Rust code,
if you haven't before.
With some intro to it, so don't worry too much.
Any other questions?
Yeah?
But this way, you're kind of pushing the problem
to the compiler side.
So you probably have a lot of errors
showing up about concurrency issues,
what you do to it in general.
Definitely.
This is now the compiler's job to tell you
when you are right and wrong.
And just like comparing JavaScript
to a language like Java, with types,
sometimes JavaScript works, even though the types are weird.
And you're trying to call an integer
as though it were a function.
So long as you never use that piece of code,
it's not going to crash.
But Java would say, hey, that's a type error.
You can't do that.
Here, Rust is going to give you compile errors
for all of the places where you're doing something
potentially wrong, even if it wouldn't have caused
a problem in the first place.
So it's more restrictive.
But as a result, it's always safe,
unless you specifically say unsafe.
Then it's not always safe.
Yeah?
So is it like, at compile time, I
should be able to figure out how should I
access the concurrency as a shared memory?
Rather than dedicate that problem to the compile time,
where if I don't, I don't need it.
Exactly.
So the big benefit here is that now we're
able to do this stuff at compile time.
And what we are doing is effectively type inference,
where we're saying, track the type,
the exclusive or shared type of this variable,
and infer it as it goes along.
Anytime we run into a conflict, raise an error.
So wouldn't that reduce the parallelism even more?
Because in the new text, it kind of
allows being optimistic about it.
And you just let all the threads run.
And no matter who gets the, yeah,
you can use runtime checks to do that.
But at compile time, you're preemptively
forcing the order of threads getting used to it.
I think that's a fair argument.
Is this not potentially slower?
But counter-argument, right?
So it is more restrictive in what you can write.
What that means is either you have to write,
what you end up is with something slower,
or you have to write the code correct
so that it's equally fast, or potentially faster,
and you're never going to get cycles.
Yeah.
But it's maybe harder to write that mid-tier
where it's fast sometimes, and it crashes sometimes.
But that's probably a good thing.
Yeah.
I'm going back to the slow example.
Was there a reason for that?
Or is it all coming down to power?
Is that the fact that it's high performance?
Do I have to make it?
I would have to think about it.
We can think about it in Office Hours together, if you want.
If you want to learn more about the piece
that we were just talking about, considerations on code
crafting, finding the next 10,000 aliasing bugs.
I'll post it on Piazza as well, if you want to read it.
They basically walk through a lot of the same ideas.
I did not generate all of these ideas myself.
Mostly I read about them this morning.
So they go into more about the types,
if you want to look at that.
And the idea of permissions with exclusive types.
Things of this nature.
All right.
From there, though, I think we will call it a day.
Seven minutes early.
Feel free to drop by Office Hours.
If you want to write some Python code.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Let me.
I'll do it.
I'll do it.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60.
59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 78,
79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 93, 94, 94, 93, 94,
